- We will discuss tax savings in much more detail
later in the course, when we discuss
retirement savings programs,
education savings programs, et cetera.
But I wanna give you simple tips
to put on your radar screen right now,
because our biggest expense is going to be taxes,
for the rest of our lives.
It's unfortunate, but it is what it is.
If you can save just a few percent every year
on lower taxes, then the long-run savings,
in addition to your wealth, can be significant.
And I realize that all countries, provinces,
states, and towns have different tax codes,
and I know that each new political leader
that gets elected often changes taxes,
or changes the tax codes.
As a result, what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna keep
this lesson and all tax-related lessons
generic enough that they can help to save you money
regardless of where you live.
And so in the United States, the governing body here
in charge of taxes is the Internal Revenue Service,
also called the IRS.
And their website can be helpful
if you have tax questions, at www.irs.gov.
In Barbados, it's called the Barbados Revenue Authority,
and their website
is www.bra.gov.bb.
And these websites are amazing,
and browsing them, for your country,
every now and then, will help you to realize
that there's more tax benefits
that you're not aware of, and that you should
be taking advantage of.
And so for my students in all other countries,
the governing body and website address,
if you need, can be accessed right here in the course.
Okay, let's get started.
The following 14 tax-savings tips
are sorted alphabetically.
It might apply where you live.
And you can also access this video, if you need to,
in the future, by clicking on this button,
in Excel exercise number three.
And the same thing goes for all 17 videos,
per these buttons here, in the course.
And so in order to save you time, I will provide
a menu, as I mentioned, just like this one,
at the start of all 17 expense-savings videos,
in case some are not applicable to you.
Okay, let's get started.
Tax-savings tip number one:
buy from another state or province tip.
And often, taxes are only collected
on stuff you buy if that product was made
in the province or state that you live in.
So if this is applicable,
order products from another state or province
so that you pay less in tax.
For example, when I used to buy software
when I lived in the Province of Ontario, Canada,
I had to pay 8% more in tax
than if I ordered the software from the province
I do not live in, which was Quebec.
Okay, tax-savings tip number two:
charitable tax tips.
Please keep all mileage and receipts
for your commutes to and from charitable events.
And of course, always ask for tax receipts
when you donate money,
as this will hopefully convince you
to donate more in the long run.
And take a picture of your car's odometer
before and after you finish driving to a charitable event.
Then during tax season, look through the photos
on your mobile device, to get the mileage results.
And you can also track your mileage
by attaching an internet-of-things device
to your car, in what is called
your car's ODB port, to track mileage.
Or just look at your calendar at the end of the year
and track mileage by looking at the address you drove to
in your calendar.
And we're gonna talk a lot more about your car's ODB port
and how to save a lot of money on auto-related expenses,
in the car and transportation expense savings lesson.
There are several helpful apps and website services
that can really help you with deductions,
such as these offerings from software company Intuit.
And we're gonna talk a lot more about some
of Intuit's amazing expense software products,
later in the course.
Separately, quite often you can get a charitable
tax deduction benefit if you donate stuff
that you currently own.
Okay, tax-saving tip number three:
company tax benefits tip.
If you work at a company, your company
might have many tax-savings benefits
that you're just not aware of, like
savings matching plans, et cetera.
So if applicable, call human resources
or speak with your supervisor for a list
of employee benefits, or just look at your employee manual
if applicable, as companies have so many perks
that you might not be aware of.
And I'm sure they get a tax benefit as well
for providing you with these perks anyway.
Tax-saving tip number four:
education tax tip.
If your country offers tax-free savings plans
for your children's education, then please
max out your contribution every year, if you can,
because it's similar to a retirement savings program
and your money can grow tax-free.
And you only pay taxes when you take the money out,
many years from now, when this amount
is worth a heck of a lot more than it is today.
And so in the United States,
an education savings program is called a 529 plan.
In Canada, it's called an R-E-S-P.
And a lot of countries have this in place as well.
To get more information on educational tax-savings programs
in your country, if applicable,
please go to this location
in the Complete Personal Finance Dashboard Excel file.
Okay, tax-savings tip number five:
environmental tax break tip.
Get solar on your roof,
if the tax subsidies are great where you live.
And so in California, Christine, my wife, and I,
we had solar installed on our roof
because, of course we care about the environment,
but the tax benefits are amazing.
And you can choose to buy or lease,
meaning rent, the panels on your roof.
And don't buy them, please.
I want you to rent or lease them instead.
And I wanna explain why.
There's actually three reasons.
Number one: it's cheaper to lease or rent them.
Number two: these panels usually depreciate
by about 5% per year, and by year 20
they wear out and they're not worth basically anything.
And number three, and this one's big:
if the solar company goes out of business,
it will cost the bankruptcy courts a lot of money
to remove the panels,
and they're not gonna bother doing so anyway,
which is actually what happened to us.
The solar company we used was called Sungevity,
which went bankrupt.
Our panels are still on our roof,
and our electricity meter actually rolls backwards
as we generate electricity during the day.
And just make sure that there's tax incentives
in place though, and these laws change
quite often so please do your research.
Tax-savings tip number six:
hire an accountant, okay.
This might sound obvious but please hear me out on this one.
I want you to keep every single receipt
and please try your best to have an accountant
file your taxes, as I promise you, I promise you
that there are tax benefits and deductions
that you're not taking advantage of, regardless
of your age, occupation, or where you life.
And hire an accountant that is not expensive.
And I promise you, you will find ones
that are not expensive by talking to your friends
or parents, or mentors at work.
And they will recommend who to hire.
And a lot of them, again, are not expensive,
and they can find you a ton of breaks.
This will keep you out of trouble as well,
as ignorance of the law, of tax law,
is not an excuse.
The accountant that you're hiring is so important
for your financial well-being.
I want you to get in the habit of calling your accountant
before investing a large amount of your money,
as they might tell you: wait, wait.
Do that from your tax-savings account instead.
Sometimes it's impossible to actually move an investment
that you already made to a tax-savings account
after you've made that investment.
Or better yet, the accountant
might even convince you to not make that investment,
which will certainly justify their hourly rate.
And so for an example,
go to treasury.gov, that website in the U.S.,
or your government website, and search, if applicable,
to see if your accountant is registered
or operating legally.
And some countries offer this.
This is why I like to get referrals from friends
or your older and wiser relatives,
when it comes to hiring an accountant.
So Google the accountant's name too, obviously.
All states and all countries and all provinces
have different licensing rules.
So know this when you search
for an accountant online.
I think accountants are usually likely
to get you much more money back in refunds, in the long run,
than if you filed on your own.
And accountants spend years studying to be an accountant,
and most of them keep up-to-date
with the constantly-changing tax codes.
So not hiring an account, if you can,
is like considering doing some medical procedures yourself.
And if you have a very basic return,
you can even file yourself
if you have very minimal income at this point in your life.
And there's actually a lot of free filing systems
in many countries, online, at government websites.
So just do a Google search.
And many times, actually, the larger tax companies
in your country, they'll let you do your taxes
online for free, at their websites.
What they'll then do is they'll try to upsell
more services to you.
Or you can use software
to do it for a minimal cost,
like TurboTax, there's another one called TaxAct.com
and others, as they link to your banks
and credit cards, and they import the data,
make it easier for you to do.
I worry about security issues with that though.
We're gonna cover identity theft protection
and using software programs for your finances,
much later in the course.
Okay, so tax tip number seven:
hire your kids.
(laughing)
If you run
your own business, full-time, like I do,
or on the side, then hire your kids
to do some of the administrative or filing,
or data entry work, as you may get a tax break
and you can actually teach them lessons
about making and saving money at the same time.
And there's usually a limit though, on how much
you can pay them annually.
And the tax code changes all the time on stuff like this.
So for example my kids work
and they get about $1,000 annually tax-free,
when I pay them to do administrative stuff,
in what's called their Roth IRA accounts.
IRA is a retirement account.
We're gonna discuss retirement savings
in a lot more detail later.
Okay, tax tip number eight:
housing expense tip.
You actually might be able to depreciate
part of your house,
if you use it for a business.
But tax codes change constantly on this,
so either ask your accountant or do more research on this.
Tax-savings tip number nine:
job search tax tip.
In many countries, most people don't realize this,
but in many countries all or most
of the expenses related to finding a job
are actually tax deductible.
So please keep all your receipts and track your mileage
if you drive to interviews.
And as a quick side-note here, if you wanna track
your mileage, please click this icon here in the course.
And we'll discuss mileage tracking
a few more times later on in the course,
but you can track it here.
We'll come back to that soon.
Tax-savings tip number 10:
moving expense tip.
Moving expenses can be deducted in many places,
not all but many.
So please just keep the receipts
and the mileage detail as well.
Tax tip number 11:
perception of expenses tip.
Okay, this is a little out there but bear with me please.
I want you to think about everything
that you buy as costing you close to twice as much
because of taxes.
Tax rates are really high in a lot of countries,
and if you include income tax, state tax,
or provincial tax, VAT tax, GST tax,
or other taxes and sales taxes
and property tax, et cetera, then you know what?
The total tax that you might be paying
could be 50%, which means
every dollar you spend on anything you wanna buy,
just think of it as costing you 100% more
because half goes to tax, okay?
It's a perception thing.
Thinking that way will make you save
a little bit more money too.
Okay, so think about everything
costing twice as much as you think.
I know that's kind of out there,
but if you condition yourself to thinking
that everything you buy costs way, way, way, way more
because of taxes, then you know what?
You'll end up spending less and think twice
before you make a purchase you don't need.
I wish I had told myself that years ago.
Okay, tax-savings tip number 12:
refund of taxes tip.
If you get an unexpected tax refund,
100% of that unexpected amount
should immediately be put into your savings account
or reduce high-interest expense-related debt items
from credit cards, by paying them off.
Never, ever, ever, ever, ever spend money
you get from tax refunds,
especially unexpected tax refunds.
Out of sight equals out of mind,
within reason of course.
Okay, tax-savings tip number 13:
retirement tax tip.
Please maximize your retirement savings contribution,
if available, every single year,
especially when you're younger.
And the older you,
meaning you many years from now, the older you
will thank you for this.
We're gonna discuss what to invest
in your retirement account, and how to diversify
your retirement portfolio, in part three of the course.
Okay, and so retirement programs are a little bit different
in all countries, but for the most part
they're focused on helping you save money today,
in a retirement account that is tax-free.
And then similar to the education savings account
that we spoke about,
when you take that money out of the tax account
many years from now, when you retire, guys,
you pay taxes then on a much bigger amount,
so let your money work for you.
And not taking advantage of retirement savings accounts
is literally like throwing your hard-earned money
in the garbage.
In the United States, it's called the 401k program.
That's the retirement account most people use.
In Canada it's called the R-R-S-P,
or the Registered Retirement Savings Program.
And if you want more information
on the retirement savings program in your country,
if applicable, please go to this location
in your Complete Personal Finance dashboard Excel file.
Tax-saving tip number 14:
other or additional tips.
And again, this is all sorted alphabetically.
So for additional tax incentives where you live,
please Google tax incentives in your country name,
or see this link here.
And we're gonna talk a lot more about tax shelters,
and what to invest in when it comes to retirement
savings programs, et cetera, a little bit later
in the course.